# spyglass
`spyglass` is a PWM (position weight matrix)-based implementation of a DNA binding motif finder. It is a tool that identifies enriched motifs in 1-D genomic regions given a list of known motifs. 

Alternate description:
`spyglass` is a Python package that detects the enrichment of known DNA-binding motifs in genomic regions. This PWM (position weight matrix)-based implementation performs a subset of the `findMotifsGenome.pl` command available through Homer (see the [Homer](http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/ngs/peakMotifs.html) page for more details). 

[Prerequisites](#prerequisites) | [Installation](#install) | [Basic Usage](#usage) | [spyglass Options](#options) | [File formats](#formats) | [Testing](#testing)

<a name="prerequisites"></a>
## Prerequisites
`spyglass` requires the following python libraries to be installed:
- numpy
- pandas
- pyfaidx
- scipy
- seqlogo

These packages can be installed with `pip`:
```
pip install numpy pandas pyfaidx scipy seqlogo
```
Note: If you do not have root access, you can run the command above with additional options to install locally:
```
pip install --user numpy pandas pyfaidx scipy seqlogo
```

<a name="install"></a>
## Installation
Once required libraries are installed (please see [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)), please install `spyglass` with the following commands:
```
git clone https://github.com/kyrafetter/spyglass.git
cd spyglass
python setup.py install
```
Note: if you do not have root access, you can run the command above with additional options to install locally:
```
python setup.py install --user
```
If the install was successful, type `spyglass --help` to show a useful message.

<a name="usage"></a>
## Basic Usage 
The basic usage of `spyglass` is:
```
spyglass [other options] ref.fa peaks.bed motifs.pwm
```
To run `spyglass` on our mini test files (see `example_files`):
```
spyglass example_files/test_ref.fa example_files/test_peaks.bed example_files/test_motifs.pwm
```
This should produce the output below:
```
INSERT OUTPUT
```
To compare to output of [Homer](http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/ngs/peakMotifs.html) `findMotifsGenome.pl`, run:
```
findMotifsGenome.pl example_files/test_peaks.bed example_files/test_ref.fa homerPeakAnalysis
```
<a name="options"></a>
## spyglass Options
`spyglass` has the following required arguments (please see [File Formats](#formats) for file specifications):
- `ref.fa`: faidx indexed reference sequence in Fasta format
- `peaks.bed`: BED file of genomic peak regions (this will commonly be peak calls from ChIP-seq datasets)
- `motifs.pwm`: PWM file of motif PWMs of interest. `spyglass` will determine whether these motifs are significantly enriched in `peaks.bed`

Additionally, users may choose to specify the optional options below:
 - `-b BACKGROUND`, `--background BACKGROUND`: BED file of user-specified background genomic peak regions. Default: background sequences are randomly chosen from the reference genome
 - `-o FILE`, `--output FILE`: write output to this file. Default: stdout
 - `-l LOGFILE`, `--log LOGFILE`: write log to file. Default: stderr
 - `-p PVAL`, `--pval PVAL`: p-value threshold for significant enrichment. Default: 0.0000001 
 - `-r REVERSE`, `--reverse REVERSE`: consider reverse complement in enrichment analysis. Default: True
 - `-s SEQLOGO`, `--seqlogo SEQLOGO`: generate motif logo of enriched motifs. Default: True
 - `--version VERSION`: print the version and quit. 

<a name="formats"></a>
## File Formats
### Input Files
`ref.fa` is a reference genome sequence in FASTA format. It contains the name of the chromosome followed by the sequence:
```
>chr[name]
[chromosome sequence]
```
`peaks.bed` is a tab-delimited file in BED format with no header. It contains 6 columns as follows:
```
chromosome    start_coordinate    end_coordinate    peak_ID    .    strand(+/-)
```
`motifs.pwm` contains the PWMs of motifs-of-interest. It contains the name of motif followed by a 4 tab-delimited columns of weights (using alphabetical order of
nucleotides, ACGT), one row per motif position:
```
>[motif name]
weight_A    weight_C    weight_G    weight_T
```
### Output Files
`spyglass_results.txt`, the final output file, contains the following tab-delimited columns:
```
motif_name    number_foreground_peaks_with_motif    number_background_peaks_with_motif    p-value    enriched(yes/no)
```
The list of motifs will be sorted so that enriched motifs are listed first and by p-value significance (smallest to largest). 

<a name="testing"></a>
## Testing

<a name="contributors"></a>
## Contributors 
This repository was generated by Michael Chan, Kyra Fetter, and Jessica Wang. We credit [`mypileup (CSE185 Project Demo)`](https://github.com/gymreklab/cse185-demo-project) for inspiration and direction.

Please submit a pull request with any corrections or suggestions. Thanks!
